In the next few lectures, we will look at
a very powerful technique for designing algorithms
called dynamic programming.
So, the starting point of dynamic programming
is to consider, what we would call inductive
definitions. Now, there are many very simple
functions which we come across which are inductive.
So, we all know that mathematically n factorial
is n times n minus 1 factorial. So, we can
write an inductive definition of factorial
as follows. The base case, okay, is when n
is 0 and in this case the factorial is 1,
so f of 0 is 1.
And in general, if we have n greater than
0, then f of n is given by n times f of n
minus 1. In other words, we express the factorial
of n in terms of the same function applied
to a smaller input, now this kind of inductive
definition is not restricted only to numeric
problems, you can also do it for structural
problems. So, for example in a list or an
array, you can consider a sub list or a sub
array as a smaller problem.
So, here is a very simple way of describing
insertion sort. So, if I want to sort n elements,
then the way insertion sort does is that of
course, if there is nothing to sort in the
base case, then we have done. Otherwise, we
look at the rest of the list starting from
the second element and we recursively sort
it, right, and then we insert the first element
into the sorted list.
So, the insertion sort applied to X1 to Xn,
requires us to insert the value X1 in the
recursively sorted X2 to Xn. So, again we
are applying the same function that we are
trying to define to a smaller input and in
the base case, the smallest input, namely
the empty one,, we have an answer which is
readily available to us.
So, one of the attractions of having inductive
definitions is that they yield in a very natural
way recursive programs. So, we do not have
to think much, we can almost take the inductive
definition and directly translate it as a
program. So, here is a translation for factorial
which more or less reflects the structure
that we had before, remember that the structure
that we had before that was that f of 0 is
equal to 1 and f of n is equal to n times
f of n minus 1.
So, we say if n... Now, just to make it little
more robust, so that people give, they give
negative numbers, we get sensible answers,
so just checking n equal to 0, you can just
check for any value 0 or less, we will just
return 1. If somebody asks us for a factorial
of minus 7, we will just return 1. But the
expected thing is that they will start with
0 and then if they give us a positive number
which is bigger than 0, then we will go to
the recursive keys.
So, we will compute factorial for n minus
1 multiply by n and then return this answer,
well. So, there is a very direct one to one
correspondence between this inductive definition
and the recursive program and that is what
makes inductive definitions very attractive
from the point of view of describing a function.
Because, the inductive definition can be mathematically
justified and then the program is obviously
correct; obvious in quotes, because it follows
directly from the recursive of the inductive
definition.
So, what such inductive definitions exploit
is what is sometimes called the optimal substructure
property. So, what this complicated phrase
means basically is what you expect from an
inductive definition that is you solve the
original problem by combining solution to
sub problems. So, the solutions to the original
problem are derived in terms of solutions
in the sub problem and in particular to this
sub problem is of the same type, then it is
computing the same type of answer.
Now, in numerical question like factorial,
it does not make sense to say something is
optimal, but for example, when you doing insertion
sort and certainly when you sort the sub list,
the result of that is what you want for that
sub list. So, this gives raise to a notion
of a sub problem. So, factorial of n minus
1 is a factorial sub problem of factorial
of n obviously, but it is just so happens
that factorial of n, only required factorial
of n minus 1.
Now, we could have problems which require
more than one immediate is smaller sub problem,
for instance factorial n minus 2 is also a
sub problem, n minus 3 is also a sub problem
and so on. So, any smaller input can be treated
as the sub problem of the original thing.
Likewise, when we actually do insertion sort,
we give it the input X1 to Xn and we ask to
sort X2 to Xn. So, this is the sub problem
which is directly part of the state.
But, in general one could think of any segment
X i to X j to sort as a sub problem of sorting,
this would happen for instance in something
like merge sort or quick sort, especially
in merge sort where you break up the array
into halves and then into quarters and so
on, so at any given point you are applying
the same algorithm to some segment from A
i to A j.
So, now let us look at a problem that we have
seen before in the context of greedy algorithms.
So, we looked at the problem called interval
scheduling. So, interval scheduling said that
we had a resource which is available over
a period of time and now people will come
and make bookings for these resources. So,
somebody may want to book it during this segment,
somebody else may want to book it in this
segment, somebody else may want it during
this segment and so on.
Now, during these overlapping things, you
cannot give the resource to two people, so
you have given a set of request each for the
starting time and an ending time. So, we have
a start and an end or a finish time and now
what you want to do is, decide which of these
requests you can allocate, so that the maximum
number of bookings are actually granted. So,
the goal is to maximize the number of bookings,
not the length of the bookings, but the number
of bookings.
So, in this particular case, what happens
is that when you honour a booking, now if
a booking happens to be overlapping with a
few other bookings, then if I decide to take
this booking, then this goes away. So, these
two bookings, which overlap with it, can no
longer be scheduled, because they have a conflict
with this in sometime interval. So, therefore
now we have to solve or find a way of allocating
the remaining bookings for some subset of
the problem of the bookings.
So, each subset of the bookings is a sub problem
in this case and the strategy that we saw
was a greedy one, which said to pick the one
which has the earliest finishing time. So,
among all those bookings which are still available
to us to allocate, we pick one in a greedy
way by just looking at it among all those
that remain at the earliest finishing time.
Now, this as we said, when we add, will eliminate
some bookings which are in conflict. That
gives us a sub problem and you will solve
these sub problem.
So, how many sub problems are there? Now,
we have N bookings and every possible subset
of this is a sub problem, so we have an exponential
number of sub problems. In general, we have
any possible subset could be our answer. So,
we have to look through all these exponential
things in principle in order to find the best
allocation, the one that gives the maximum
number of bookings to be satisfied.
Now, what our greedy strategy does is effectively
it cuts down this exponential space into a
linear space, because what it does is to pick,
so we have initially bookings 1 to N. Then,
it will pick among these let us we assume
that are actually sorted by order of the earliest
finishing time. So, you will take the first
one, then you will rule out a few from there.
And now you will have some remaining and among
those we pick the earliest one and you will
rule out of you more and so on. So, at most
you will allocate all N of them, but in each
time once you rule include 1, you will rule
out a few. So, certainly in a linear scan,
you would look at only that many sub problems.
So, you would only look at order N sub problems
and find, what you claim is an optimal answer.
And since, you are doing such a drastic deduction
from 2 to the N and order N; obviously, there
is a question to ask whether you overlooked
some sub problems accidently by not examining
them at all. So, you need a proof, so that
is why in a greedy strategy, you need to prove
that what you are doing actually makes the
solution come out to be correct, because you
are really not looking at a large number of,
not considering a large number of sub problems.
So, suppose we change the interval scheduling
problem very slightly, we associate with each
request a weight, a weight could be for example,
the amount somebody is willing to pay, so
may be people are trying to book, so we have
an auditorium which we rent out for performances
and other activities. And people, who come
to use it are willing to pay to use it. Of
course, there is only one auditorium, so two
people cannot use it at the same time.
Now, our earlier goal was to maximize the
number of bookings that we gave, but now,
we have another criterion which is more immediate,
which is how much each person is willing to
pay. So, even if give to only one person,
if that person is paying a lot more than everybody
else, then that would be optimum for us. So,
now our aim is to maximize the total weight.
So, we want to get as much revenue as possible
from our allocation not the number of bookings,
but the total weight.
So, recall the greedy strategy in the earlier
case, we wanted the earliest finish time.
So, if we saw this particular selection of
three requests, then the earliest finish time
would be this one. So, we would first take
this, that would rule out this and then because
the third request starts after the first one
completes, so you will take this and so we
will get two bookings. And this 2 out of 3
is the best we can do and that was find in
the un weighted case.
But, now unfortunately, what we have is that
we have a weight, so we have this weight associated
with this. So, we have to do something little
more clever, because now if we choose the
first one and the third one, then the total
weight is only 2.
So, job, not job, but let us call it booking
1 plus 3 gives a weight of 2, whereas booking
2 alone gives a weight of 3, because it has
a weight 3. So, ideally in this situation,
we should recognize that the middle request
has enough weight to overcome the penalty
of it being the only one that will be scheduled.
So, though we will one get out of 3 request
schedule, we actually get a maximum benefit
from the cost prospect. So, therefore that
what just means in other words is the greedy
strategy which we proved for the un weighted
case is not valid any more unfortunately.
So, what shall we do? so one strategy is to
see is there another greedy strategy, we can
search for another greedy strategy and try
to argue that it works and argue that it works
as we saw is rather it takes a little bit
of effort. Because, we have to use an exchange
argument of some such thing to proof that
is better than any solution that you could
get by any others strategy.
So, the other approach which is what we are
going to look at in more detail in the next
few lectures is to try and look for an inductive
solution which is obviously correct but which
can be evaluated efficiently. So, the goal
is to find to save, so what we are going to
save is this effort in proving that by looking
only at a few cases, we are actually producing
an optimal answer. We would in some sense
look at every case, but we look at every case
in a clever way and that is what, we are going
to do.
So, how do we do this for this problem is
for this time, let us do something which is
more direct, then what we did last time ones
for looking at the earliest finishing time,
just look at the earliest starting time. So,
let us assume that or tasks or requests or
call order is like this. So, we pick them
up in this order. So, we are begin with the
first booking which you called b 1.
Now, observe that in the final answer, either
b 1 is there, or b 1 is not there. So, we
will take two options. So, yes b 1 and no
b 1, now if we eliminate b 1, then our sub
problem just consists of b 2 onwards. So,
we just have a sub problem which says b2 to
b N. So, if we exclude b 1, then we just use
b 2 to b N. So, exclude b 1 means just throw
it out and pretend you only had N minus 1
jobs to begin with.
On the other hand, if we include b 1, then
you have to be a little bit careful, because
now if I include b 1 in this particular thing,
so if we include b 1, then we have to rule
out something which is in conflict. So, we
eliminate all the conflicting requests as
we did in the greedy case and then we have
another sub problem which is not necessarily
b 2 to b N, it will be some subset of b 2
to b N.
But we have now taken both options, we have
included b 1 and excluded b 1, so it is more
reasonable to expect that we have a either
a solution with b 1 or without b 1, there
are no third option, the solution either has
b 1 and does not have b 1, we are trying to
evaluate both and then we are trying to choose
the best one. So, this is an inductive decomposition
of the problem with two sub cases with b 1
without b 1, we are not making any predictions
about which is better, we evaluate both and
take the better one.
So, now let us argue that this kind of strategy
actually considers all the options. So, just
like b 1 for any b j, the solution either
has b j or does not have b j, this is very
clear. So, there are 2 to the N possible solutions,
I could either have b 1 or not b 1, have b
2 or not have b 2. So, I can try every possible
subset that would be a group force argument,
we want to avoid having to try every possible
subset.
Now, for b 1 we have clearly checked both
cases explicitly, what about b 2, can we be
sure that we are checking all cases are b
2 ? So let us look at b 2. Now, if b 2 and
b 1 are not in conflict that is b 1 and b
2 or in disjoint intervals, then whether or
not b 1 is chosen is independent or whether
not b 2 is chosen. This means that whether
we choose b 1 or b 2 the resulting sub problem
would still allows to choose b 2.
So, whether we choose b 1 or b not of that
b 1 or not b 1 at the beginning, it will be
considered in both sub problem and when, we
solve that you will take the both choices.
On the other hand, b 1 and b 2 do not or not
comparable, that is b 1 rules out b 2 or b,
because they overlapped. Then, when b 1 is
chosen b 2 cannot be there, so b 1 can be
there only if b 2 can be there only b 1 is
not there.
So, when b 1 is chosen we will not considered
b 2, but b 1 is not chosen remember that we
get the resulting sub problem b 2 to b N.
So, again b 2 will be chosen or given a chance,
therefore b 2 we will consider all options
in the presence or absence are b 1. Likewise,
we can argue that b 3 will be considered in
the presence or absence of b 1 and b 2 and
what is happening as we are going along making
a more on more commitments, we are ruling
out lot of incompatible combinations which
we would otherwise blindly consider, we get
2 to the N.
Now, will shall have to evaluate the efficiently,
but the at least that is not that difficult
to believe that we are actually trying out
every possible option. We are not in advance
deciding that some local criteria like in
a greedy strategy is enough to rule out certain
sub problems as being useless.
So, the computational challenge comes from
the fact that the sub problems that we generate
make appear again and again. So, let us look
at a simple case, you supposing we are the
picture that is shown below. So, we have b
1 and b 2 which are in conflict, but notice
that both b 1 and b 2 are compatible with
everything that comes after words. So, if
we choose b 1, then we have to rule out b
2 and so the sub problem, we get is b 3, b
4 and b N.
On the other hand, if you rule out b 1 as
we said before you will try out everything
that remains namely b 2 to b N. Now, what
happens you need to try b 2 to b N, so now,
when you come to b 2 to b N, you have to discard
b 2 or you have to keep b 2. So, supposing
you discard b 2, then what happens when you
discard b 2 from here, you precisely get the
remaining part which is b 3 to b N.
So, you again generate a b 3 to b N problem
which we had already asked once in the context
of choosing b 1. So, you now have that you
have choose b 1, say yes, no; if you choose
b 1 I get this problem which is b 3 to b N.
Then, if I choose no, then I get a chance
to choose b 2 again yes, no and now if I do
not choose b 2. Then, I discard b 2 again
I get b 3 to b N, so I will be solving this
problem once here and once here, unless I
do something clever.
So, the whole problem with this approach is
that the inductive solution can give rise
to the same problem at different stages. And
if we just use recursion as we said before
one of the great benefits of having on inductive
definition is that you can just write a recursive
solution which just mirrors the inductive
definition of the problem. But if you do it
naively, every time you come to the function
to be done inductively, you recursively call
that same function, even if you have done
it before and this can be very expensive as
we shall see.
So, the goal of dynamic programming is to
avoid this wastefulness. So, there are two
techniques that we will see, there is a technique
called memoization, which is a way to build
in some cleverness into recursion. So, that
you never call this same function twice recursively.
And dynamic programming will then be a way
to avoid doing these recursive calls all together.
So, dynamic programming is a way to enumerate
the sub problems directly and solve them,
knowing that the sub problems have some dependencies
which you can predict.
So, we will look at these two techniques,
the next couple of lectures and look at several
examples to get familiar with these notions
of memoization and dynamic program, which
are essentially ways of making inductive definitions
at the corresponding recursive implementations
efficient to solve.